[Music]
so this is the logo for the artisan
machine intelligence program as it said
we are run out of research at Google
we're kind of a super scrappy operation
but we've managed to do some pretty
interesting things largely because of
the compelling nature of the technology
that that really initiated the program
which was deep dream and we've taken it
further and I'm going to talk a little
bit today about some of the inherent
qualities of that technology some of the
projects that we've done with it and how
we might be able to use this as a way of
modeling our own thinking in other
domains and what the implications of
that might be so to try to draw
something of a historical thread around
what we're doing what you see here is a
digital Erie projected image of the
anamorphic skull in hands Holbein the
younger 1553 painting ambassadors this
image is used as evidence to support the
thesis that the ancient the sorry the
old master painters were using lenses
and that actually the old master
painting is a precursor to photography
here's another piece from this is from
1965 it's by Frieder naka it's one of
the first pieces of computer art is made
with a plotter and it was inspired by a
informational esthetic theory and this
is trippy squirrel dot jpg which was
leaked in June of 2015 on on reddit
speaking of Reddit and then so just
again to sort of try to make a
connection between a few leaps in
imaging technology and perception and
what we're really talking about is
evolving modes of perception that are
reflected in the tools that we use for
artistic production so whether we're
talking about the anamorphic skull or
paintbrush assisted photography chemical
photography photography with a
conceptual framework around it that
emerged from 60s thinking about art or
computer vision systems like this image
here which is a hallucination of the
face net neural network what we're
talking about are techniques of
representation that increase in
complexity so we you know starting with
the hand and the eye
adding the lens adding processors adding
now neural nets and these new
complexities and modeling and
representation are altering our modes of
perception or creating new modes of
perception I just want to give a little
shout-out to some research I recently
learned about at UCSD there's a group
called Carta that's working on and
anthropogenic Virginie basically the
origins of human civilization and human
biology and there's some research
they've been doing that suggests that
the tools that we used before we had
language actually enabled us to develop
language and it wasn't the anunnaki that
gave us that but what I'm trying to say
is that our moment which is highly
complex and highly multi-dimensional is
probably having the same effect on us
and as someone who interfaces with a lot
of art that uses highly
multi-dimensional mathematical and
computational structures I believe that
I'm perceiving certain things
differently because of that experience
and I want to share a little bit of that
with you so well we need to talk about
first is hallucination and I'm pretty
sure that everyone here knows exactly
what that means for them but in this
particular context we're going to go
back to trippy squirrel and talk a
little bit about neural nets
hallucinations so just like with our own
visual systems and it's interesting to
note that computer perception machine
vision systems are modeled very closely
in a cartoonish way but closely on our
own optical perception and that our own
eyes do have neural tissue in them with
with these types of systems you can not
only do analysis on perception but you
can also reverse the process and do
generation of images and this is what
happens here iteratively with trippy
squirrel that as I said leaked online
and a bunch of narratives evolved around
it
some of them came directly from pop
culture and some of them were sort of
tried attempted manufacturing from
Google research to sort of constrain
something that was a little bit crazy
but the bottom line is that these
structures are part of something called
deep learning which and many people are
probably familiar with here I'll gloss
over it quickly neural nets and they're
on the architecture was something that
Alan Turing actually formulated at the
beginning of procedural computation they
had a revival in the 90s and we were
finally able to implement them and then
recently with the advent of graphic
processor units for vector math and
video games we've been able to build
much deeper stacks of neural net
architectures and those have enabled big
leaps in all different domains the way
that they're trained is by taking
massive amounts of images doing back
propagation on the weights so the
weights are the nodes connecting these
points and an iterative fashion and sort
of optimizing the net against you know
with testing to make sure that it knows
what it's looking at which has already
been labeled by humans and so we're sort
of embedding human knowledge in this
highly multi-dimensional structure to
talk a little more about that
multidimensionality just to just to go
back to the categories here so what you
see here arthropods mollusks you know a
bunch of different categories there's
image data associated with them
the recognition process is one of
creating linear separability between
features so just to get into like a
brief amount of math so that we can
really understand the multi-dimensional
nature of these systems in the central
image you see a straight line separating
filled and close and open circles are
filled in hollow circles rather the
formula the formula for that line is
very simple - straight line if you move
some of the filled dots into the
territory of the unfilled dots you
require a curve to separate them
linearly so the categorical systems that
do image recognition are essentially
learning categories like empty or filled
dots and creating linearly separable
mathematical structures that are
embedded inside what there's labeled as
a hidden layer
of a neural net so the input is the
image and each of those dots would be a
pixel and the output would be a category
and in this in between you have all this
in mesh self interconnected structure so
if you imagine those those dots
happening in 3d space to create
separable 'ti it's planar separable 'ti
right you would need to create like a
big folded sheet that would wrap around
all these things and then when you
imagine that these neural neural nets
for machine perception actually function
with up to hundreds of thousands of
dimensional points of of input you're
talking about a folded hyperplane right
so we can deal with 2d we can deal with
3d we can sort of conceptualize 4d sort
of but like talking about five hundred
thousand dimensional space does not work
for our modes of cognition and yet we we
have these systems that rely on them in
order to do classification so here are
some images that were output from deep
dream by the engineer Alexander Morton
stuff who developed the tool originally
and these are sort of visualizations of
what the categories look like right so
but as soon as you kind of move from an
analytical Apollonian space of analysis
and gridded understanding and planers
hyperplane or separation and
categorization and language into the
generative playful Dionysian space you
have you enter into a different sort of
modality of perception and certain
interests come to the fore like art so
let's just look at how this works here
you have a perceptual system and each of
these would be pixels these neural nets
depict certainties on layers detect
certain features and you can say well
that's a bird now if we run the system
backwards this is what how the
hallucination works you basically do use
the same weight and you print out what
you're looking at
and you get something that doesn't look
quite like a bird but it has bird-like
features and that's enough for a machine
to mostly accurately recognize birds so
again this space of Apollonian
analytical gridded separation quickly
slides into like psychedelic bugs and
creepy crawly playfulness in an artistic
context that can also be used you know -
well this and here's the shot from the
show which is in this very room and it's
the first show of its kind of art of
neural nets and it was also a workshop
much like today the following day we had
a workshop but it can also be used it to
pull in the structures that it's
engaging with and one of the challenges
with new media ardath's garden general
is that there's a lot of tech
development that goes into making it but
people often overlook the frameworks
that it's pulling in and the sort of
choices that the artists make in the
process of engaging with those so here's
a piece by memo Acton who's presenting
either today or tomorrow and it's GCHQ
the surveillance government surveillance
building in London as seen by Google
Earth treated with deep reme and so
there's a sort of compression of
structures of imaging and structures of
social organization and power relations
that are in this image so some of the
other work I'll show you is oriented
towards describing how that's working
for artists or I'm trying to frame their
work in a little bit of a different
context in a lot of the new media art
you might see just for another example
this is a piece by constant dollar which
was shown at the Nicodemo in Los Angeles
just recently it's interesting to note
that this is like a little over a year
later from this initial show we had here
an independent artists are picking up
the tools and using them also in
critical ways this was a piece that he
has it's a category visualization of a
bubble and it has been fabricated as an
oil painting by painters in China
shipped to the US where it was car coded
in Los Angeles and then hung on the wall
here so again engaging with these global
structures of production and with
symbolic overlays of how they're you
know bubbles etc
9 evenings was already mentioned so we
did a project around the 50-year
anniversary of 9 evenings this was in
Seattle at the King Street Station in a
5,000 square foot train station and on
to show a little bit of it this was a
project we did where Mike taiko
generated hallucinations that we
projected with a Steadicam a Steadicam
operator was wearing a Steadicam with a
with a Kinect and a projector and a car
battery and we live traced the
silhouette of a Bhutto dancer and
projected deep reme hallucinations on
her because if you have a chance to
combine AI and Bhutto you always should
do that
[Music]
necessarily engage as deeply in the
technological infrastructure as some of
the other projects and I'm going to show
but this was also our first attempt at
doing a sort of artist engineer
collaboration with two very divergent
visual languages speaking of language
that's another thing that we can
hallucinate and the artist Ross Goodwin
who was mentioned by Caroline is
somebody that we've been working with
his techniques his technology uses
recurrent neural nets and long
short-term memories which is another way
of saying a high dimensional statistical
space of language trained on large
corpora PSA's of text which can then be
moved through in a generative way to
generate sequences of letters words
sentences paragraphs etc we recently
went on a road trip with him myself and
a photographer from ami for a project he
called word car which was a surveillance
camera mounted to Cadillac connected to
a an AI that was generating poetry about
what it saw and I thought this was a
really interesting opportunity to to
explore kind of what there is on the
road I wrote an essay about it which
I'll show a little screencap of and it
was really framed within the context of
the road trip the literary road trip the
American literary road trip on the road
to electric kool-aid acid test Fear and
Loathing in Las Vegas because Ross is
generating a two hundred thousand word
novel so it started by the machine had
certain perceptual abilities so it could
see through this camera it could tell
what time it was it could tell where it
was by GPS and it had access to the
Foursquare API I thought these are
really interesting modes of perception
these are very different than human
modes of perception I don't know what's
in the Foursquare API I don't walk
around thinking about the corporate
businesses and structures around me to
the exclusion of everything else but
that is in some ways what was happening
here so the red and white flags and the
stars were like a curtain of paper like
a broad stream of flowers white clouds
and blue sky spread out on the road and
in the storm there was a silvery star
like streak of sleeping children a pair
of jeans were still on the table and the
long black stains of hair shown in the
cloud of flowers
and more on the nose Hard Rock Hotel and
Casino Biloxi a hotel in Biloxi a high
fisherman with the starry face and a
stub of a coat on his face and his shirt
looking boldly across his mouth so
there's these aren't quite there yet in
terms of like semantics but they are
kind of beautiful Dada is poetry and
recently it was it was proposed to me
that we might actually be looking back
it was nostalgia these dust early AI art
moments when we can no longer tell the
difference between generated texts by
humans and text but robots so there's an
essay on our medium blog we do have a
medium blog for the program I this is a
brief excerpt from it another high
dimensional mapping of language that we
haven't done any projects with this yet
but this is something that is out there
it's called word Tyvek and it's a vector
space representation of grammar so you
can do simple math on words relationally
so you can say king is the queen as man
is to woman as you can see there those
are mathematical transformations that
are done in vector space you can change
the tense of the word you can create
relational analogies between things
Spain is to Madrid as Italy is to Rome
etc so again this is a high dimensional
space that is experienced in a linear
way by moving through it in iterations
right so the deep dream imagery it all
has a similar look and feel but yet no
image is exactly the same and that's
because everything is coming from one
thing so in a weird way of looking at
the dream might be that you actually are
seeing the same thing always no matter
what's happening with it but you're only
seeing a tiny portion of it at a time
and that speaks to the high dimensional
nature of this thing what I'm
experiencing is that I've had moments
recently where I've started to perceive
high dimensionality in situations and
I'll talk a little bit about some ways
that that works after I show this one
project so there's a there's a way of
translating between dimensional depth
it's called tis neeti distributed
stochastic neighbor embedding we resume
you can basically take these high
dimensional data sets
visualize them into and 3d like a
landscape so this is the Google Arts and
Culture archive from different museum
collections as a traversable landscape
here's another shot of that we did a
project with Rafiq Anatole who's a media
architect in LA this is some work he did
at the Disney Concert Hall with
projection mapping he took the archive
of the salt museum in Istanbul and with
Mike tyka did a high dimensional mapping
of it you can see collect connections
between features here there's 1.7
million objects on the archive and what
you're able to do through his
visualization which is installed in a
circular projection mapped room with
mirrored floor and ceiling to create
this kind of infinite effect is see the
collection all at once in a way that no
one really has ever been able to do
before you're also able to move through
the spaces with of related content
related pieces within the collection and
so Rafik is really pushing towards a new
way of interacting with archives and
libraries and a new way of doing
research that is only possible when you
move everything up into a higher
dimensional space and then move it back
down into a lower dimensional space so
when I call dimensionality reduction I
like to think of as dimensionality
translation because we're moving high
dimensional machine perception down into
visible sensible spaces to us but I
believe that in the process of doing
this we are retraining our brains to
think more high dimensionally and to
actually reinflates flat concepts of
that we have in language to create more
to create higher dimensional ways of
communicating and relating to each other
so I'm also another example of this
installation that Rafik is built this is
a VR way of interfacing with it you can
use it to surf the contents and pulse
you can sort of do like a white matrix
room where you have all the stuff around
you and you can pull and do research
that way and so we're kind of he's
looking at can you build a new way of
interacting with an archive and doing
real research where you can see the
whole structure of it at once and then
also zoom down to the small scale and
collect individual pieces that are
relevant to the
and lastly with this piece mike tyka did
some hallucination of that embedding so
what we see here are images that could
exist in the archive but don't so these
are this is another statistical
hallucinatory walk through this high
dimensional space and the output are
these thumbnails unfortunately the GPUs
are not there's not enough memory now to
hallucinate like a full spectrum image I
would love to read what would be written
in these things it would probably be
very dreamlike but for the moment we can
get a taste of what might be possible in
not only analyzing and understanding
high dimensional landscapes of images
and archives but also generating them in
a way that statistically related to
what's there already and all this is
live now in Istanbul at the salt Museum
so just to sort of zoom in to maybe more
social structure something a little more
embodied that we can talk about the
concept that I was putting forth of
dimensional translation I want to talk a
little bit about some research that my
director blazer Gregory arkose at Google
has done with a personal study that he
did on the weekend around gender so this
is going to be a small slice of what's
in this study the basic gist of it is
it's a 65 question survey but took about
two and a half minutes to complete there
were questions on gender sexuality
identity and presentation and this was
done with 3,000 Mechanical Turk ores
which are people that use a Mechanical
Turk service you can pay them to
basically do anything and he was using
them a survey correspondence these
questions were cut work around four
different areas they weren't presented
that way they're presented just as a
flat list of questions you could answer
they were not in two interdependent you
could answer any which way about any
single one of them so there were some
about body there was some about tropes
of gender presentation and there was
some about attraction and identity I'm
not going to cover that but here's some
of his findings I've highlighted a few I
just want to focus on there is in the
research you can see a rough binary it's
not completely binary stick
there is a spectrum and actually the
higher dimension in the more high
dimensional resolution you add to the to
the rendering of the data the more the
more you can actually see a high
dimensional nature to gender as it's
expressed by these participants so if
you flatten this down to a single value
using this technique of singular value
decomposition you essentially end up
with the binary that we have now
linguistically if you fold in some of
the presentational aspects you get a
smoother curve the middle never drops
out entirely but you do kind of have
clusters as belief says here there's no
excluded middle our categorization of a
person the one of the other group will
clearly be an approximation so if we
move into higher dimensional
perspectives we can see here using the
body principles alone these colorings
are based on the identification response
from the participant so as you can see
that it's still mixed and there is some
of that spectrum in between if you fold
in the presentational principles you get
a different result and the you know the
conclusion we can draw from this is that
in a multi-dimensional space it's much
more complex than even our simplistic
linguistic identifiers that we have now
that are largely based on one
dimensional thinking about this as a as
a binary construct I mean we can
literally say that like our binary stick
is framing our perceptions and when we
start to develop a more high dimensional
language and nuanced language around it
we reinforce language to warp to meet
that and we're sort of undergoing that
process now right non-conforming bodies
representations are likely to accompany
a non-performing identity although there
are exceptions and either way the person
that idea is often surprising so again
binary language binary construct binary
representation of data spectral
representation and high dimensional
representation so
I'm gonna sing a little song for you
guys and I I really want to I want to
try to tie this into the larger idea
about high dimensional thinking kind of
moving from mathematics into
visualizations into constructs about
social structures and presentation and
identity and actually into interpersonal
relationships I there's a particular
song that I'm thinking of and I had a
conversation with my friends I mean
Winokur where he said how are you going
to be mad at someone in a manifold when
I mentioned this to him in what we were
talking about was a song that I had
heard song many times in in various
space of high dimensional access to my
own internal processes and it says it's
a healing song and the words as you'll
see how help in a moment I mean I heard
the song a bunch of times and sometimes
it was a little annoying and grating to
me and sometimes it was really beautiful
on cathartic and then at this one moment
I heard it in this way where I was like
holy Wow hold on a second like I'm
hearing a whole set of relations within
embodied in this and the you know I'm
hearing an understanding of victimhood
and understanding of guilt gratitude and
love combined in a single sort of
sentiment that is highly dementia
multi-dimensional and complex and
enables people to sort of move through
the traumas of their own lives in a way
that unpacks their roles in a more
complex way than rather identifying as a
victim or a perpetrator and so the song
is a Hawaiian song it goes like this
Buono Buono Buono Buono Buono Buono
Buono Buono Buono
no oponopono upon the pond or porno
porno I love you I'm sorry please
forgive me
I thank you I love you I'm sorry
please forgive me I thank you and it
loops yes thank you thank you I've heard
and seen that song really unleash a lot
of trauma in people and the point I'd
like you to take home is that this
multi-dimensional thinking there's these
new tools that we're developing don't
have to necessarily just be interfaces
to you know corporate food distribution
networks along Interstate freeways they
can also be new models for
conceptualizing not just our own
identities within society but identities
in relationships with each other and the
roles that we play with each other and
the time that we spend with each other
in this highly multi-dimensional way is
much more rich and complex than we maybe
have been given language to express so
and that's what I'm hoping we're doing
with artisan machine intelligence thank
you
[Applause]